.TH PCB2GCODE 1 "2015-02-17"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.SH NAME
pcb2gcode \- command-line tool for engraving PCBs using CNCs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pcb2gcode
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the \fBpcb2gcode\fP command.
.PP
\fBpcb2gcode\fP is a program that takes the files typically produced by PCB
(printed circuit board) designing tools, in particular Gerber (RS-274X) and
Excellon (an RS-274C variant) files as parsed by \fBgerbv\fP, and produces
files that can be used to control a CNC (computer numerical control) milling
machine. These files are in G code format (RS-274D/NGC) that can be read, for
example, by the linuxcnc EMC2 system.

When these files are executed, an engraving bit is used to remove the surface
from a copper covered circuit board, thus creating isolated areas. In another
step, holes are drilled into the board at the appropriate positions, and it can
be cut out in another step. (For each step, a separate output file is created.)
.SH OPTIONS
These programs follow the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').
A summary of options is included below.

Instead of passing all options on the command line, nearly all options can be
stored in a file named \fImillproject\fP. There, options are given one per line
as \fIoption\fP=\fIvalue\fP pairs (without the two dashes), and can be
separated by blank lines and commented (everything after a `#` character is
treated as a comment). Options that don't take an argument (like
\fB\-\-metric\fP) are entered as \fIoption\fP=true or \fIoption\fP=1 there.

Unless configured otherwise, numeric values are in units of inch and
inch/minute. When the \fB\-\-metric\fP option is given, they are in mm and
mm/minute.

.TP
\fB\-\-front\fP \fIfilename.gbr\fP
Engrave the front side according to the given file (typically used in two-sided
boards).
.TP
\fB\-\-back\fP \fIfilename.gbr\fP
Engrave the back side according to the given file.
.TP
\fB\-\-outline\fP \fIfilename.gbr\fP
Cut out the board to the shape exposed in the given file. Typically, there is
only a polygon in this gerber file. Alternatively, this file can contain a
closed line chain (see \fB\-\-fill-outline\fP).
.TP
\fB\-\-drill\fP \fIfilename.cnc\fP
Convert the given file (containing drill sizes and positions) to G-code.
.TP
\fB\-\-preamble-text\fP \fIfilename\fP
gcode text preamble file, inserted at the very beginning as a comment. All the
round parenthesis will be converted to angled parenthesis (due to gcode's 
comments limitations). You can use this to include the license header at the 
top of the gcode output files.
.TP
\fB\-\-preamble\fP \fIfilename.ngc\fP
gcode preamble file, inserted at the very beginning
.TP
\fB\-\-postamble\fP \fIfilename.ngc\fP
gcode postamble file, inserted before M9 and M2
.TP
\fB\-\-g64\fP \fIunit\fP
maximum deviation from toolpath, overrides internal calculation

.PP
For every option \fB\-\-x\fP that takes a filename, there is an
\fB\-\-x\-output\fP option that specifies where the resulting G-code is saved,
defaulting to \fIx.gbr\fP. Instead of giving each output file name, the
\fB\-\-basename\fP option can be used; the base name will be used as a prefix
to the default output file names. You can also specify the output directory
with \fB\-\-output\-dir\fP; if unspecified, the output files will be created
in the current directory.

.PP
The parameters that define engraving are:
.TP
\fB\-\-zwork\fP \fIunit\fP
Z-coordinate at which engraving happens
.TP
\fB\-\-zsafe\fP \fIunit\fP
Z-coordinate for movements between engraving steps
.TP
\fB\-\-mill\-feed\fP \fIunit/minute\fP
feed rate at which engraving takes place (horizontal speed)
.TP
\fB\-\-mill\-speed\fP \fIrpm\fP
spindle speed during engraving (rounds per minute)
.TP
\fB\-\-offset\fP \fIunit\fP
distance by which the tool movement will be outset from the contours in the
gerber file to be engraved

If this distance can't be satisfied because copper areas are too close, a
warning will be printed and the line will be drawn between the areas. This
behavior can be used to get voronoi-style (flood-filling) areas; simply set the
offset to a large value (like 1 inch).
.TP
\fB\-\-extra\-passes\fP \fInumber\fP
number of additional isolation passes
For each extra pass, engraving is repeated with the offset width increased by
half its original value, creating wider isolation areas.

.PP
The parameters that define drilling are:
.TP
\fB\-\-zdrill\fP \fIunit\fP
Z value down to which will be drilled
.TP
\fB\-\-zchange\fP \fIunit\fP
Z-coordinate for movements with the drill head
.TP
\fB\-\-drill\-feed\fP \fIunit/minute\fP
feed rate for drilling (vertical speed)
.TP
\fB\-\-drill-speed\fP \fIrpm\fP
spindle speed during drilling (rounds per minute)
.TP
\fB\-\-milldrill\fP
If \fB\-\-milldrill\fP is given, the milling head will be used to drill the
holes in the PCB. Holes up to the size of the milling head will be drilled
regularly (possibly creating a bigger hole than intended), the other holes are
created by moving the head in circles using the feed and infeed parameters used
in cutting.
.TP
\fB\-\-drill\-front\fP
use the coordinates of the front side for drilling instead of the coordinates
of the back side
.TP
\fB\-\-onedrill\fP
use only one drill bit size
.TP
\fB\-\-nog81\fP
replace G81 with G0+G1. This option makes the gcode compatible with low-end 
cnc controllers (like grbl), but also makes it bigger and less clean

.PP
Outline cutting takes another set of options:
.TP
\fB\-\-cutter\-diameter\fP \fIunit\fP
amount by half of which the tool path is outset from the shape in the outline
file
.TP
\fB\-\-zcut\fP \fIunit\fP
Z-coordinate indicating where the outline cutting ends
.TP
\fB\-\-cut\-feed\fP \fIunit/minute\fP
feed rate at which outline cutting takes place (horizontal speed)
.TP
\fB\-\-cut\-speed\fP \fIrpm\fP
spindle speed during outline cutting (rounds per minute)
.TP
\fB\-\-cut\-infeed\fP \fIunit\fP
maximum Z distance that is cut away in a single pass (positive value; if less
then zcut's value, there will be more than one pass)
.TP
\fB\-\-fill\-outline\fP
If \fB\-\-fill-outline\fP is given, it is assumed that the outline file
contains not a polygon but a closed chain of lines. The board will be cut along
the centres of these lines.
.TP
\fB\-\-outline\-width \fIunit\fP\fP
thickness of the lines that form the outline (if \fB\-\-fill-outline\fP is given)
.TP
\fB\-\-cut\-front\fP
cut from the front side. Default is from the back side
.TP
\fB\-\-bridges \fIunit\fP
add bridges with the given width to the outline cut.
\fB\-\-bridgesnum\fP bridges will be created for each outline closed line. This
option requires \fB\-\-optimise\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-zbridges \fIunit\fP
bridges height (Z-coordinates while engraving bridges, default to zsafe)
.TP
\fB\-\-bridgesnum \fInumber\fP
sets the numer of bridges to be created (\fB\-\-bridgesnum\fP bridges for each
closed line)

.PP
The autoleveller feature allows you to mill your project on a surface that
isn't at exactly the same height in every point. To use the autoleveller
feature you need a probe tool connected to your machine. The autoleveller
process is composed by two parts:
.IP \[bu] 2
Initial probing, where the machine "probes" a grid of points and save
their heights. In order to save probing time, only the area where the PCB
must be milled will be probed.
.IP \[bu]
Actual milling, identical to the standard process, but with an additional
Z-correction (based on a bilinear interpolation of the probed points)
.PP
Unfortunately each control software (LinuxCNC, Mach3, ...) uses different
gcodes for the probing, the parameters and the macros, therefore the output
gcode won't be software-independent, and you have to choose the used software
with the proper argument.
.TP
\fB\-\-al-front\fP
enable the autoleveller for the front side
.TP
\fB\-\-al-back\fP
enable the autoleveller for the back side
.TP
\fB\-\-software\fP \fIsoftware\fP
the height probing commands are different from software to software. Use this
option to select the used software; currently supported softwares are
\fBLinuxCNC\fP, \fBMach3\fP, \fBMach4\fP and \fBcustom\fP. With custom you
can specify \fBal-probecode\fP, \fBal-probevar\fP and \fBal-setzzero\fP, in
order to generate gcode for an unsupported software. For compatibility
reasons, the \fBcustom\fP gcode is much bigger (3-4 times) than the gcode for
a supported software.
.TP
\fB\-\-al-x\fP \fIunit\fP
the width of the probing on the X axis. Higher values increase the levelling 
precision but also increases the probing time (but not the milling time)
.TP
\fB\-\-al-y\fP \fIunit\fP
the width of the probing on the Y axis. Higher values increase the levelling
precision but also increases the probing time (but not the milling time)
.TP
\fB\-\-al-probefeed\fP \fIunit/second\fP
probe speed on the Z axis. Higher values decrease the probing time but also 
increase the wear of the probing tool
.TP
\fB\-\-al-2ndprobefeed\fP \fIunit/second\fP
if specified, use \fB\-\-al\-probefeed\fP as probing speed for the probing
grid, then change tool and do a single probe at a speed of
\fB\-\-al-2ndprobefeed\fP with the new tool. This option is useful if you want
to reduce the wear of the tool during the probing without decreasing the probe
speed; in this way you can use a "bad" bit for the probing, change bit and use
the "real" bit just for one probe. Moreover, when \fB\-\-al-2ndprobefeed\fP is
specified, you can set \fB\-\-al-probefeed\fP<=\fB0\fP in order to disable the
probing grid. You can use this to start again a project without probing the
whole grid again (don't close the control software).
.TP
\fB\-\-al-probe-on\fP \fIcommand(s)\fP
insert these commands at the start of the probing sequence, replacing the 
standard M0 command. You can use this argument to add a M64/M65 command
(LinuxCNC) to automatically enable the probe tool. Use an at sign (@) to
insert a newline
.TP
\fB\-\-al-probe-off\fP \fIcommand(s)\fP
insert these commands at the end of the probing sequence, replacing the 
standard M0 command. You can use this argument to add a M64/M65 command 
(LinuxCNC) to automatically disable the probe tool. Use an at sign (@) to
insert a newline
.TP
\fB\-\-al-probecode\fP \fIcode\fP
custom Z probe code. For example, LinuxCNC uses \fBG38.2\fP while Mach3, Mach4
and TurboCNC use \fBG31\fP. If unspecified, \fBG31\fP will be used. This
option is relevant only when \fB\-\-software\fP=\fBcustom\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-al-probevar\fP \fInumber\fP
custom Z probe result variable. For example, LinuxCNC uses \fB5063\fP while
Mach3, Mach4 and TurboCNC use \fB2002\fP. If unspecified, \fB2002\fP will be
used. This option is relevant only when \fB\-\-software\fP=\fBcustom\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-al-setzzero\fP \fIcode\fP
custom gcode for setting the actual height as the zero of the Z axis. For
example, LinuxCNC uses \fBG10 L20 P0 Z0\fP while Mach3, Mach4 and TurboCNC use
\fBG92 Z0\fP. If unspecified, \fBG92 Z0\fP will be used. This option is
relevant only when \fB\-\-software\fP=\fBcustom\fP

.PP
These options govern the general behavior of \fBpcb2gcode\fP:
.TP
\fB\-\-optimise\fP
optimise output gcode, reducing its output size up to 95%, while accepting a
very little loss of precision
.TP
\fB\-\-dpi\fP \fIdpi\fP
resolution used internally (defaults to 1000). If the software freezes during
the layer exporting, try to increase the dpi value. Sane values for dpi are
1000/2000 for DIP PCBs and 2000/4000 dpi for SMD PCBs.
.TP
\fB\-\-mirror\-absolute\fP
mirror operations on the back side along the Y axis instead of the board
center, which is the default
.TP
\fB\-\-svg\fP
output SVG file (EXPERIMENTAL)
.TP
\fB\-\-metric\fP
use metric units for parameters. Does not affect output code
.TP
\fB\-\-metricoutput\fP
use metric units for output code
.TP
\fB\-\-zero-start\fP
set the starting point of the project at (0,0). With this option, the projet
will be between (0,0) and (max_x_value, max_y_value) (positive values)

.PP
The only options that can't be used in the \fImillproject\fP file are the
common ones and noconfigfile:
.TP
.B \-\-noconfigfile
Disable the parsing of the millproject file. Use this option if you want to
manually pass all the arguments as command line parameters
.TP
.B \-?, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gerbv (1),
.BR pcb (1).
.br
.\" from man(7)
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac

For further information about \fBpcb2gcode\fP, see the
.URL "https://github.com/pcb2gcode/pcb2gcode/wiki" "project wiki" "."
.SH AUTHOR
pcb2gcode was written by Patrick Birnzain, loosely based on an earlier program
of the same name by Jeff Prothero (Cynbe ru Taren), which in term was based
even more loosely on Matthew Sager's gerber_to_gcode.
.PP
This manual page was written by chrysn <chrysn@fsfe.org> and Nicola Corna 
<nicola@corna.info> for the Debian project
(and may be used by others).
